---
layout: post
title: M. Bongard and his problems
--

Example Bongard Problem
https://hackernoon.com/im-harvesting-credit-card-numbers-and-passwords-from-your-site-here-s-how-9a8cb347c5b5

He's messing with the heuristics (like adding a time variable) moving from a "i'll apply everything in my toolkit problem" to a "I know I don't know the answer" problem.


# Bongard problems
Bongard problems reverse the normal style of problem to be solve. We may reasonably expect a question is offered and the answer needs to be found. Problems designed by Russian scientist M. Bongard give you the solutions, and you need to figure out how you got there.

When looking at Bongard problems, we can look at the solutions to previous problems and build a list of potential answers to search through (example for GEB). Unfortunately, there is no guarantee that anyone has seen the sort of problem before. The solution may not be in your toolbox. We can try to match a known solution or a know problem approach, but something may not fit.

We learn problem solving by looking at problems that have solutions. This is how our success at problem solving is measured in school. If we're lucky we can look in the the back of the text book for the answers, and figure out how to work towards them. This cuts the problem in half, like starting a tunnel at each end and hoping to meet in the middle. Starting from an question and an answer we're filling in a method. If we do well at this we call ourselves 'problem solvers'.

This however is not how we experience many problems in life. We don't usually recognize that we're looking at a *fundamentally different class of problem* . The problem we have, with it context and constraints has simply not *been seen before*.

I'm arguing here that simply applying a well understood systemic appproach may not work here. Forget best practice, or asking a big consultancy what has worked somewhere else.

Bongard problems ask - how did we get here. This is a signiificant difference to normal problem solving, but it gets better.
Working in a complicated domain, such as IT, we're asking what needed to happen for this problem to occur. Knowing this, fixing the issue is relativly straightforward, but not always easy. Things can get very complicated.

What we often see is a bongard problem, what had to happen to get here, in a complex domain, where what happened last time we did X won't happen again.

If that's the case, why do we even care how we got here?
